---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# dApps 101

Welcome to the world of decentralized applications, or dApps, in Grams. Dive into this comprehensive guide to understand the essence of dApps, how they integrate seamlessly with Subjects, and the unique features that make them stand out.

## What are dApps?

dApps are applications that run on a decentralized peer-to-peer network, free from the control of a single authority or entity. Unlike traditional web applications that operate on centralized servers, dApps are hosted on blockchain networks, ensuring a transparent, immutable, and secure environment.

In the Grams ecosystem, dApps are special. They are hosted on the InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) and are designed to support various frontend frameworks. This means developers can craft single-page applications that are both decentralized and flexible in their design.

## dApps & Subjects: A Seamless Integration

One of the groundbreaking features in Grams is Subjects. When combined with dApps, they create a formidable duo:

- **Modularity**: Just like Subjects, dApps are designed to be modular, ensuring that components can be reused across multiple projects.
- **Interoperability**: Subjects ensure that dApps can communicate and interact seamlessly with other decentralized components.
- **Scalability**: With the protocol-agnostic design of Subjects, dApps can scale effortlessly across various blockchain platforms.

## Hosting dApps on IPFS

Storing data on centralized servers has its limitations. Enter IPFS, a protocol and network designed to make the web faster, safer, and more open. Grams dApps leverage IPFS to host single-page applications, ensuring:

- **Decentralization**: Data is stored across a network of nodes, ensuring no single point of failure.
- **Persistence**: Data remains accessible even if parts of the network go down.
- **Named Access**: With the Grams browser extension, users can access dApps via recognizable names, improving the user experience.

## Supporting Multiple Frontend Frameworks

The power of choice is essential for developers. That's why Grams dApps are designed to support various frontend frameworks. Whether you're working with React, Vue, Angular, or any other popular framework, Grams ensures your dApp is compatible and runs smoothly.

## Building dApps

Starting with dApps in Grams is a breeze. Choose any of your preferred options below

- **Desktop App**: For a visual approach, our application interface is available for [download](https://grams.dev/download/).

- **CLI**: For terminal enthusiasts:
   ```bash
   npm install -g @grams-dev/dApps
   gdx create myAwesomeDApp -t react-typescript
   ```

## Dive Deeper into dApps

Eager to learn more? Navigate through the extensive resources, tutorials, and documentation available in this wiki. From advanced features to best practices, embark on a deep dive into the world of Grams dApps.