---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Subjects 101

Subjects form the foundation of decentralized development in Grams. Subjects is an interface definition language and a set of tools that allows developers to build decentralized applications in multiple programming languages. A Subjects model enables developers to compose varied viewpoints for defining and managing their application's state and behavior, as well as to define interaction rules.

## Anatomy of a Subject

The term “subject”  defines the idea of reflecting a smaller, more focused perception of a complex shared model, including:

- **State**: Represents current data or status.
- **Behavior**: Dictates the Subject's actions.
- **Triggers**: Events a Subject can initiate.
- **Subscriptions**: Monitors specific events to invoke certain behaviors.

## Example of a Subject Model

```subject
subject Organization {
   version: "1.0.0"
   states: [Team]
   behaviors: [JoinTeam]
}

state Team {
   members: TeamMembers
}

list TeamMembers {
   member: TeamMember
}

structure TeamMember {
   @required
   name: string
}

behavior JoinTeam {
   input: string
}
```

:::info What's this syntax?

Subject models are defined using either the [Subjects IDL](specification/idl) or the [JSON AST](specification/ast). The JSON AST representation of a model is typically an artifact created by build tools to make them easier to use by other tooling.

:::

## Getting Started with Subjects

- **Desktop App**: For a visual approach, our application interface is available for [download](https://grams.dev/download/).
- **CLI**: For terminal enthusiasts:
   ```bash
   npm install -g @grams-dev/subjects
   gsx create myNamespace # or use 'gsx init myNamespace' to add it to your existing package
   ```

Creating a new subject namespace will create the below folder structure in the terminal's working directory:

```markdown
- myNamespace/
   - subjects/
      - myNamespace.subject
   - .gitignore
   - subjects-build.json
   - package-lock.json
   - package.json
   - README.md
   - tsconfig.json
```

Subjects are declared inside a namespace to provide an encapsulation for multiple subjects and contracts within an application. We therefore recommend using `gsx` at the root of your npm package.

:::info Want a complete dApp?

Try out our package manager [`gpm`](#) which simplifies creating and managing complete decentralized applications.

:::

## Shapes and Traits

A Subjects model consists of shapes and traits. Shapes are instances of types. Traits are used to add more information to shapes that might be useful for transpiling, building, or documentation.

### Shapes

Shape types are grouped into three categories:

- [Simple types](specification/types/simple): Simple types are types that do not contain nested types or shape references.
- [Aggregate types](specification/types/aggregate): Aggregate types contain configurable member references to others shapes.
- [Subject types](specification/types/subject): Types that define a Subject and its nested members like state and behaviors.

### Traits

Trait types are grouped into five core categories, but you can create as many as you would like!

- [Constraint traits](specification/traits/constraint): Traits that define constraints and validations for data shapes.
- [Type Refinement traits](specification/traits/refinement): Traits used to refine and change data types.
- [Behavior traits](specification/traits/behavior): Traits that alter the behavior and functionality of data shapes.
- [Documentation traits](specification/traits/documentation): Traits for documenting and providing metadata about data shapes.
- [Subject Traits](specification/traits/subject): Traits specific to subjects, defining their characteristics and behavior.

## Building the model

You can build your model against any of the supported plugins, or even create your own plugin. Simply run:

```bash
gsx build
```

Building a more customized Subjects model requires modifying the configuration file, subjects-build.json. This file is used to describe how a model is created and what projections of the model to create, as well as which plugins to run.

The following is an example subjects-build.json configuration:

```json
{
   "namespace": "my.namespace"
   "version": "1.0",
   "license": "Apache-2.0",
   "sources": ["subjects"],
   "plugins": [
      {
         "name": "ast",
         "outputDirectory": "model"
      },
      {
         "name": "typescript",
         "outputDirectory": "client"
      },
      {
         "name": "solidity",
         "outputDirectory": "contracts"
      }
   ]
}
```

## Next Steps

There's plenty more to explore in Subjects. The [Subjects specification](specification/) can teach you everything you need to know about the Subjects model. [Guides](guides/) can teach you more about the build process, including how to use transformations, projections, plugins, and more. [Advanced Guides](advanced/) will cover topics including managing registeries and creating custom plugins.